
DEFINITION
   
UDP (User Datagram Protocol) is a communications protocol that is primarily used for establishing low-latency and loss-tolerating connections between applications on the internet. It speeds up transmissions by enabling the transfer of data before an agreement is provided by t
How UDP works
UDP uses IP to get a datagram from one computer to another. UDP works by gathering data in a UDP packet and adding its own header information to the packet. This data consists of the source and destination ports to communicate on, the packet length and a checksum. After UDP packets are encapsulated in an IP packet, they're sent off to their destinations.

Unlike TCP, UDP doesn't guarantee that the packets will get to the right destinations. That means that UDP doesn't connect to the receiving computer directly -- which TCP does. Rather, it sends the data out and relies on the devices in between the sending and receiving computers to correctly get the data where it's supposed to go.

Most applications that use UDP wait for any replies that are expected as a result of packets sent using the communication protocol. If an application doesn't receive a reply within a certain time frame, the application sends the packet again, or it stops trying.

UDP uses a simple transmission model that doesn't include handshaking dialogues to provide reliability, ordering or data integrity. Consequently, UDP's service is unreliable, and packets may arrive out of order, appear to have duplicates or disappear without warning.

Although this transmission method doesn't guarantee that the data being sent will reach its destination, it does have low overhead, and it's popular for services that don't absolutely have to work the first time.

Applications of UDP
UDP can be used in applications that require lossless data transmission when the application is configured to manage the process of retransmitting lost packets and correctly arranging received packets. This approach can help to improve the data transfer rate of large files compared to TCP.

In the Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) communication model, UDP, like TCP, is in Layer 4, the transport layer. UDP works in conjunction with higher-level protocols to help manage data transmission services, including Trivial File Transfer Protocol (TFTP), Real Time Streaming Protocol (RTSP) and Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP).

UDP is an ideal protocol for network applications in which perceived latency is critical, such as in gaming and voice and video communications, which can suffer some data loss without adversely affecting perceived quality. In some cases, forward error correction techniques are used to improve audio and video quality, despite some loss.

UDP can also be used for applications that depend on the reliable exchange of information but should have their own methods to answer packets. These services are advantageous because they're not bound to fixed patterns to guarantee the completeness and correctness of the data packets sent. Users can decide how and when to respond to information that's not correct or sorted.

UDP can also be used for multicasting because it supports packet switching. In addition, UDP is used for some routing update protocols, such as Routing Information Protocol (RIP).

UDP can be used in applications where speed rather than reliability is critical. For instance, it might be prudent to use UDP in an application sending data from a fast acquisition where it's OK to lose some data points.

TCP vs. UDP
TCP and UDP are part of the TCP/IP protocol suite, which includes a number of protocols for carrying out network communications.

A chart displaying the differences between UDP and TCP
UDP characteristics include the following:

It is a connectionless protocol.
It is used for VoIP, video streaming, gaming and live broadcasts.
It is faster and needs fewer resources.
The packets don't necessarily arrive in order.
It allows missing packets -- the sender is unable to know whether a packet has been received.
It is better suited for applications that need fast, efficient transmission, such as games.
TCP characteristics include the following:

It is a connection-oriented protocol.
It's the most widely used protocol on the internet.
It guarantees that no packets are missing and all the data that's sent makes it to the intended recipient.
It sends packets in order so they can be stitched back together easily.
It's slower and requires more resources.
It has a bigger header than UDP.
It is best suited for apps that need high reliability, and transmission time is relatively less critical.

